Years have trailed past like clouds over a country,
And they'll never return, for they're gone forever,
And I no longer enjoy such light endeavour
As the magic of folk songs or the land of faery

Which as a child filled me with wonder,
Not quite understood yet meaning so much to me,
And now these shadows try to recapture me
In this hour of mystery, this twilight hour.

These trembling fingers touch the strings in vain
To find the right notes from the fading memory
Of youth, so that my soul can vibrate again.

Everything's disappeared from the horizon of that distant plain
And you can no longer hear the voice of past harmony.
Behind me time gathers . . . and I darken!



LUCIFER
There was, as in the fairy tales, 
As ne'er in the time's raid, 
There was, of famous royal blood 
A most beautiful maid. 

She was her parents' only child, 
Bright like the sun at noon, 
And like the virgin midst the saints 
And among stars the moon. 

From the deep shadow of the vaults 
Her step now she directs 
Toward a window: at its nook 
Bright Lucifer expects. 

She looks as in the distant seas 
He rises, darts his rays 
And leads the blackish, loaded ships 
On the wet, moving, ways. 

To look at him every night 
Her soul her instincts spur; 
And as he looks at her for weeks 
He falls in love with her. 

And as on her elbows she leans 
Her temple and her whim 
She feels in her heart and soul that 
She falls in love with him. 

And ev'ry night his stormy flames 
More stormily renew 
When in the shadow of the castle 
She shows to his bright view. 

And to her room with her slow steps 
He bears his steps and aims 
Weaving out of his sparkles cold 
A toil of shaking flames. 

And when she throws upon her bed 
Her tired limbs and reposes, 
He glides his hand along her breast 
And her sweet eyelash closes. 

And from her mirror on her shape 
A beam has spread and burns, 
On her big eyes that beat though closed 
And on her face that turns. 

Her smiles view him; the mirror shows 
Him trembling in the nook 
For he is plunging in her dreem 
So that their souls may hook 

She speaks with him in sleep and sighs 
While her heart's swelled veins drum: 
-"O, sweet Lord of my fairy nights, 
Why comest thou not? Come! 

"Descent to me, mild Lucifer, 
Thou canst glide on a beam, 
Enter my dwelling and my mind 
And over my life gleam! " 

And he listens and trembles and 
Still more for her love craves 
And as quick as the lightning he 
Plunges into the waves. 

The water in that very spot 
Moves rolling many rings 
And out of the unknown, dark, depth 
A superb young man springs. 

As on a threshold o' er the still 
His hasty steps he leads, 
Holds in his hand a staff with, at 
Its top, a crown of reeds! 

A young Voivode he seems to be 
With soft and golden hair; 
A blue shroud binds in a knot on 
His naked shoulder fair. 

The shade of his face is of wan 
And thou canst see throughout- 
A handsome dead man with live eyes 
That throw their sparkles out. 

"From my sphere hardly I come to 
Follow thy call and thee. 
The heaven is my father and 
My mother is the sea. 

"So that I could come to thy room 
And look at thee from near 
With my light reborn from waves my 
Fate, toward thee I steer. 

"O, come, my treasure wonderful, 
And thy world leave aside; 
For I am Lucifer up from 
  And thou wouldst be my bride. 

"In my palace of coral I'll 
  Take thee for evermore 
And the entire world of the sea 
  Will kneel before thy door". 

"O, thou, art beautiful as but 
In dreams an angel shows, 
The way though thou hast oped for me 
For me' s for ever close. 

"Thy port and mien and speech are strange 
Life thy gleams don' t impart, 
For I' m alive and thou art dead 
And thy eyes chill my heart. " 

Days have past since; but Lucifer 
Comes up again and stays 
Just as before, spreading o' er her 
His clear translucent, rays. 

In sleep she would remember him 
And, as before, whole 
Wish for the Master of the waves 
Is clinching now her soul. 

"Descend to me, mild Lucifer, 
Thou canst glide on a beam, 
Enter my dwelling and my mind 
And over my life gleam! " 

He hears; and from the dire despair 
Of such a woeful weird 
He dies, and the heavens revolve 
Where he has disappeared. 

Soon in the air flames ruddy spread 
The world in their grip hold; 
A superb from the spasm of the 
Chaotic valleys mould. 

On his locks of black hair he bears 
His crown a fierce fire frames; 
He floats as he really comes 
Swimming in the sun' s flames. 

His black shroud lets develop out 
His arms marbly and hale; 
He pensively and sadly brings 
His face awfully pale. 

But his big wonderful eyes' gleam 
Chimerically deep, 
Shows two unsatiated spasms 
That but into dark peep. 

-"From my sphere hardly I come to 
Follow thy voice, thy sight; 
The bright sun is my father and 
My mother is the night. " 

"O, come, and upon thy blond hair 
And thy world leave aside 
For I am Lucifer from up 
And thou wouldst be my bride. 
 
 
 

"O, come, and upon thy blond hair 
Crowns of stars I shall crowd, 
And more that all of them, up there, 
Thou wilt look fair and proud." 
 

-"O, thou art beautiful as but 
In dreams a demon shows, 
The way thought thou hast oped for me 
For m'es for ever close". 
 

"The depths of my breast ache from the 
Desire of thy fierce love 
My heavy, big, eyes also ache 
When into them thine shove". 
 

"But how wouldst thou that I come down? 
Know this-for, do I lie?- 
I am immortal, while thou art 
One of those that must die!" 
 

"I hate big words, nor do I know 
How to begin my plea; 
And although thy discourse is clear 
I don't understand thee." 
 

"But if thou wantest my flamed love 
And that would not be sham, 
Come down on this temporal earth, 
Be mortal as I am!" 
 

"I'd lose my immortality 
For but one kiss of thine! 
Well, I will show the how much too 
For thy fierce love I pine!" 

"Yes, I shall be reborn from sin, 
Receive another creed: 
From that endlessness to which I 
Am tied, I shall be freed!" 

And out he went, he went, went out, 
Loving a human fay, 
He plucked himself off from the sky. 
Went for many a day. 

Menwhile, the house-boy, Catalin 
Sly, and who often jests 
When he's filling with wine the cups 
Of the banqueting guests; 

A page that carries step by step 
The trail of the Queen's gown, 
A wandering bastard, but bold 
Like no one in the town; 

His little cheek-a peony 
That under the sun stews; 
Watchful, just like a thief, he sneaks 
In Catalina's views. 

"How beautiful she grew"-thinks he- 
A flower just to pluck! 
Now, Catalin, but now it is 
Thy chance to try luck!" 

And by the way, hurriedly he 
Corners that human fay: 
"What's with thee, Catalin! Let me 
Alone and go thy way!" 

"No! want thee to stay away 
From thoughts that have no fun. 
I want to see thee only laugh, 
Give me a kiss, just one!" 

I don't know, I could show 
And, believe me, retire! 
But for one Lucifer from up 
I've kept my strong desire!" 

"If thou dost not know, I could show 
Thee all about love's balm! 
Only, don't give way to thy ire 
And listen and be calm." 

"So as the hunter throw the net 
That many birds would harm, 
When I stretch my left arm to thee, 
Enlace me with thy arm." 

"Under my eyes keep thine and don't 
Let them move on their wheels 
And if I lift thee by the waist 
Thou must lift on thy heels." 

"When I bend down my face, to hold 
Thine up must be thy strife; 
So, to each other we could throw 
Sweet, eager, looks for life." 

"And so that thou have about love 
A knowledge true and plain, 
When I stop to kiss thee, thou must 
Kiss me too, and again." 

" With much bewilderment her mind 
The little boy' s world fills 
And shyly and nicely now she 
Wills not, and now she wills. " 
 
And slowly she tells him: - " Since thy 
  Childhood I' ve known thy wit, 
And as thou art both glib and small 
  My temper thou wouldst fit. " 

" But Lucifer sprung from the calm 
  Of the oblivion, 
Though, gives horizons, limitess 
  To the sea lone and dun. " 

" And secretely I close my eyes 
  For my eyelash tears dim 
When the waves of the sea go on 
  Travelling toward him. " 

" He shines with love unspeakable 
  So that my pains he' d leach 
But higher and higher soars, so 
  That his hand I' d ne' er reach. " 

" Sadly thrusts from the worlds which  from 
  My soul his cold ray bar . . . 
I shall love him, for ever and 
  For ever he' ll rove far. " 

" Like the umeasured steppes my days 
  Are deaf and wild, therefore, 
But my nights spread a holy charm 
  I understand no more! " 

" Thou art a child! Let's go! Through new 
  Lands our own fate let' s frame! 
Soon they shall have trace and 
  Forgot even our name! 

" We shall be both wise, glad, and whole 
  As my judgement infers 
And thou wouldst not long for thy kin 
  Nor yearm for Lucifers! " 

Then Lucifer went out. His wings 
  Grow, into heavens dash, 
And on his way millenniums 
  Flee in less than a flash. 

Below, a depth of stars; above, 
  The heaven stars begem, - 
He seems an endless lightning that 
  Is wandering through them. 

And from the Chaos' vales he sees 
  How in an immense ring 
Round him, as in the World' s first day, 
  Lights from their sources spring; 

How, springing, they hem him like an 
  Ocean that swimming nears. . . 
He flees cared by his disire 
  Until he disappears. 

For that region is boundless and 
  Searching regards avoids 
And Time strives vainly there to come 
  To life from the dark voids. 

' Tis nought. ' Tis, though, thirst that sips him 
  And which he cannot shun, 
' Tis depth unknown, comparable 
  To blind oblivion. 

" From that dark, choking, endlessness 
  Into which I am furled, 
Father, undo me, and for e'er 
  Be praised in the whole world! " 

" Ask anything for this new fate 
  For with mine I am through; 
O, hear my prayer, O, my Lord, for 
  Thou givest life and death too! " 

" Take back my endlessness, the fires 
  That my being devour 
And in return give me a chance 
  To love but for an hour! " 

" I' ve come from Chaos; I' d return 
  To that my former nest. . . 
And as I have been brought to life 
  From rest, I crave for rest! " 

" Hyperion, that comest from 
  The depths with the world' s swarm. 
Do not ask signs and miracles 
  That have no name nor form. " 

" Thou wantest to count among men, 
  Take their resemblance vein; 
But would now the whole mankind die 
Men will be born again. " 

"But they are building on the wind 
Ideals void and blind; 
When human waves run into graves 
New waves spring from behind." 

"Fate's persecution, lucky stars, 
They only are to own; 
Here we know neither time nor space, 
Death we have never known." 

"From the eternal yesterday 
Drinks what today will drain 
And if a sun dies in the sky 
A sun quickens again." 

Risen as for ever, death though 
Follows them like a thorn 
For all are born, only to die 
And die to be reborn. 

"But thou remainest where soe'er 
Thou wouldst set down or flee. 
Thou art of the prime form and an 
Eternal prodigy. 

For whom thou wantest them to die? 
Just go and see what's worth 
All that is waiting there for thee 
On that wandering earth !" 

His first dominion in the sky 
Hyperion restores 
And as in his first day, his light 
All o'er again he pours. 

For it is evening and the night 
Her duty never waives. 
Now the moon rises quietly 
And shaking from the waves. 

And upon the paths of the groves 
Her sparkles again drone ... 
Under the row of linden-trees 
Two youths sit all alone. 
 

"O, darling, let my blessed ear feel 
How thy heart's pulses beat, 
Under the ray of thy eyes clear 
And unspeakably sweet." 

"With the charms of their cold light pierce 
My thought's faery glades, 
Pour an eternal quietness 
On my passion's dark shades." 

"And there, above, remain to stop 
Thy woe's violet stream, 
For thou art my first source of love 
And also my last dream !" 

Hyperion beholds how love 
Their eyes equally charms; 
Scarcely his arm touches her neck, 
She takes him in her arms. 

The silvery blooms spread their smells 
And their soft cascade knocks 
The tops of the heads of both youths 
With long and golden locks. 

And all bewitched by love, she lifts 
Her eyes toward the fires 
Of the witnessing Lucifer, 
And trusts him her desires: 

"Descend to me, mild Lucifer, 
Thou canst glide on a beam, 
Enter my forest and my mind 
And o'er my good luck gleam!" 

As he did it once, into woods, 
On hills, his rays he urges, 
Guilding throughout so many wilds 
The gleaming, moving, surges. 

But he falls not as he did once 
From his height into swells: 
-"What matters thee, clod of dust, if 
'Tis me or someone else? 

"You live in your sphere's narrowness 
And luck rules over you- 
But in my steady world I feel 
Eternal, cold and true!" 

And if the branches tap my pane
And the poplars whisper nightly,
It is to make me dream again
I hold you to me tightly.
And if the stars shine on the pond
And light its sombre shoal,
It is to quench my mind's despond
And flood with peace my soul.

And if the clouds their tresses part
And does the moon outblaze,
It is but to remind my heart
I long for you always.

- What are you rocking, little one?
No rain, no wind,
With the branches on the ground?
- Why shouldn't I swing,
If my time passes!
The day decreases, the night increases
And the foliage is rare for me.
The wind blows the striped leaf —
The singers drive them away;
The wind is blowing from one side —
Winter is here, summer is far away.
And why don't I leave,
If the birds pass!
Over the top of the branches
They pass in flocks,
Carrying my thoughts
And my luck with them.
And they go one by one, one by one
The dawn of the world-darkening,
And they go like moments,
Shaking wings,
And leaves me desolate,
Wasted and numb
And with longing alone,
Hand in hand only with him.

I have one more longing:
In the quiet of the evening
Let me die
At the edge of the sea;
Let me sleep soundly
And the forest is close,
The vast waters
May I have a clear sky.
I don't need flags,
I will not rich coffin,
You're weaving a bed for me
From young branches.

And nothing behind me
Don't cry on my scalp,
Only autumn has a voice
Vested leaf…
While they fall with a noise
The springs in one,
The moon is slipping
Through long fir tips.
Talent penetration
In the cold evening wind,
Above me the holy lime
Shake his branch.

How could he not be a wanderer
Since then,
They will gladly trojan me
Reminders.
Luceferi, what a rise
From the shadow of satins,
Being my friends,
He'll smile at me again.
He will moan with passion
Of the harsh sea sing…
But I will be earth
In my loneliness.


Come now to the forest's spring
Running wrinkling over the stones,
To where lush and grassy furrows
Hide away in curving boughs.

Then you can run to my open arms,
Be held once more in my embrace,
I'll gently lift that veil of yours
To gaze again upon your face.

And then you can sit upon my knee,
We'll be all alone, alone there,
While the lime tree thrilled with rapture
Showers blossoms on your hair.

Your white brow with those golden curls
Will slowly draw near to be kissed,
Yielding as prey to my greedy mouth
Those sweet, red, cherry lips . . .

We'll dream only happy dreams
Echoed by wind's song in the trees,
The murmur of the lonely spring,
The caressing touch of the gentle breeze.

And drowsy with this harmony
Of a forest bowed deep as in prayer,
Lime-tree petals that hang above us
Will fall sifting higher and higher.

Now it's autumn, leaves roam and scatter,
Again the wind flings heavy drops against the glazing;
And you're reading old letters, tattered and fading
And retrace a whole life-time in just one hour.

With sweet trifles you enjoy such time-wasting,
You'd hate to be disturbed by a tap on the shutter;
For when it's sleeting outside, it's so much better
To dream by the fireside, sleepily nodding.

So I stay in my chair, staring into the fire,
Dreaming of old tales and a fairy queen's sighs;
Around me the mist rises higher and higher;

Suddenly the rustling of silk makes me rise,
Steps so soft, barely touched by the old floor . . .
Then with slender, icy hands you hide my eyes.

Drowsy birds at even gliding,
Round about their nests alight,
In among the branches hiding...
Dear, good night!

Silence through the forest creeping,
Lullaby the river sighs;
In the garden flowers sleeping...
Shut your eyes!

Glides the swan among the rushes
To its rest where moonlight gleams,
And the angels' whisper hushes...
Peaceful dreams!

O'er the sky stars without number,
On the earth a silver light;
All is harmony and slumber...
Dear, good night!

To the star that rose
It's such a long way
That it took him thousands of years
May the lights reach us.

Maybe it died long ago on the way
in blue distances,
And her ray just now
Lights of our sight.

The icon of the star that died
slowly in the sky it rises;
It was when he didn't show up,
Today we see it, and it is not.

The same way when ours miss
Perish in the deep night,
The light of extinguished love
He's still following us.

Hardly had I thought I should learn to perish;
Ever young, enwrapped in my robe I wandered,
Raising dreamy eyes to the star styled often
Solitude's symbol.

All at once, however, you crossed my pathway -
Suffering - you, painfully sweet, yet torture…
To the lees I drank the delight of dying -
Pitiless torment.

Sadly racked, I'm burning alive like Nessus,
Or like Hercules by his garment poisoned;
Nor can I extinguish my flames with every
Billow of oceans.

By my own illusion consumed I'm wailing
On my own grim pyre in flames I'm melting…
Can I hope to rise again like the Phoenix
Bird from the ashes?

May all tempting eyes vanish from my pathway
Come back to my breast, you indifferent sorrow!
So that I may quietly die, restore me
To my own being!

Often in the middle of the woods
all the birds come out
From the hum of moles,
To the bright light,
Bright by the pool,
Which in the tall reed
Swinging from where,
it penetrates deep
And from the moon and the sun
And of migratory birds,
And the moon and the stars
And flying in turn
And the face of my dear.


The years have sped, and time still swiftly flies
Since that first sacred hour in which we met;
But how we loved I can no more forget,
Sweet wonder with cold hands and such big eyes.

O, come again! Your words inspire me yet,
While your soft gaze upon me gently lies,
That 'neath its ray new life in shall rise,
And you new songs upon my lyre beget.

When you come near to me you little know
How soothed my heart is then, as though with balm,
As when some star does in the heavens show;

Your childish smile so full of tender charm
Has power to quench this life drawn out in woe
And fill my eyes with fire, my soul with calm.

Time flows by, and has passed like rivers
Since that hallowed moment we first saw each other,
Yet I'll never forget the love we had together,
You miracle, with large eyes and cold fingers.

Oh, come back! To bring words only you can inspire,
Watch over me so your gaze gently lingers,
Let me marvel at this moment that hungers
For those new words you wring from my lyre.

You're not even aware that when you're near
A great peace descends to quell my agony,
Just like the silence at the rising of a star;

If I could only see you like a child, smiling up at me,
All the suffering of my life would disappear,
My eyes rekindle, my soul grow within me.

Sleepy birds
At the nests they gather,
They hide in the branches -
Good night!

Only the springs sigh,
While the black code is silent;
The flowers in the garden also sleep -
Rest in peace!

The swan passes over the waters
between the reeds to sleep -
May your angels be near
Sweet sleep!

Overnight enchantment
The proud moon rises,
Everything is a dream and harmony -
Good night!

One wish alone have I:
          In some calm land
Beside the sea to die;
          Upon its strand
That I forever sleep,
          The forest near,
          A heaven near,
Stretched over the peaceful deep.
          No candles shine,
Nor tomb I need, instead
Let them for me a bed
          Of twigs entwine.
That no one weeps my end,
          Nor for me grieves,
But let the autumn lend
          Tongues to the leaves,
When brooklet ripples fall
          With murmuring sound,
          And moon is found
Among the pine-trees tall,
          While softly rings
The wind its trembling chime
And over me the lime
          Its blossom flings.

As I will then no more
          A wanderer be,
Let them with fondness store
          My memory.
And Lucifer the while,
          Above the pine.
          Good comrade mine,
Will on me gently smile;
          In mournful mood,
The sea sings sad refrain…
And I be earth again
          In solitude.

So like the sweet, white cherry blossom,
So tender and so fresh thou art,
And on my life's way like an angel
Appearing thou dost light impart.

Thou scarcely touchest the soft carpet,
The silk on thee doth rustling stream,
From top to toe so light and lofty,
Thou floatest like an airy dream.

From draping folds like purest marble
Thine image unto me appears,
My whole soul on thine eyes is hanging,
Those eyes so full of joy and tears.

O happy dream of love, so happy,
Thou bride of fairy tales, so mild,
No, do not smile! Thy smile doth show me
How sweet thou art, thou gentle child.

My poor eyes thou canst close for ever
With deepest night's eternal charms,
With thy sweet lips' sweet fondling, whispers,
Embracing me with thy cool arms.

A veiling thought at once now passes
Thy glowing eyes thus covering:
It is the dark renunciation,
The sweetest yearning's shadowing.

Thou go'st away and, well I know it,
To follow thee must I no more,
Thou art for me now lost for ever,
My soul's dear bride, whom I adore.

My only guilt was that I saw thee,
Which I to pardon have no might,
Mine arm I'll stretch for ever vainly
To expiate my dream of light.

Like holy Virgin's purest image
In my fond eyes thou will rise now,
The brightest crown on forehead bearing,
Where dost thou go? When comest thou?

The radiance from that new-born star
Will take many thousands of years
To travel a path that comes so far
To finally reach our eyes.

Perhaps it died while on its way
Through infinite blue space,
Yet only now does its light stray
To shine upon your face.

Slowly climbing the dark skies
Is the dead star's icon:
Invisible when it did exist,
Today, we see an illusion.

And so it is when passion's fled
Lost in the depths of night,
The light of our love, now dead,
Still haunts us in its flight.

Water lilies load all over
The blue lake amid the woods,
That imparts, while in white circles
Startling, to a boat its moods.

And along the strands I'm passing
Listening, waiting, in unrest,
That she from the reeds may issue
And fall, gently, on my breast;

That we may jump in the little
Boat, while water's voices whelm
All our feelings; that enchanted
I may drop my oars and helm;

That all charmed we may be floating
While moon's kindly light surrounds
Us, winds cause the reeds to rustle
And the waving water sounds.

But she does not come; abandoned,
Vainly I endure and sigh
Prostrate, as the water lilies
On the blue lake ever lie.

have one last wish
When I go quietly in the evening
that they let me die
At the edge of the sea;
And the forest is close to me
And gently my dream
And over the edge of the sea
The sky wide and clear.
Don't need no lights
No rich dead board,
You just braid a bed
me from young branches.

Shouldn't anyone on the floor;
Weep for my end faintly,
Autumn only gives voice
The little withered leaf...
If forever then falls
the source with bright sound,
Glide very gently the moon
Above dark fir tent.
The sound of cowbells should hurt
in the cool evening breeze,
Leave the linden tree above me
Sublime branches go.

I will never be unstable
Then for all time
Include me in your mind
With tenderness.
rising to the evening star'
over the shade of the tann,
Be considered friends then
Happy to give a smile.
And will groan with sorrow
The sea with rough rhyme...
But I will be earth
In solitude


When death did not exist, nor yet eternity,
Before the seed of life had first set living free,
When yesterday was nothing, and time had not begun,
And one included all things, and all was less than one,
When sun and moon and sky, the stars, the spinning earth
Were still part of the things that had not come to birth,
And You quite lonely stood… I ask myself with awe,
Who is this mighty God we bow ourselves before.

Ere yet the Gods existed already He was God
And out of endless water with fire the lightning shed;
He gave the Gods their reason, and joy to earth did bring,
He brought to man forgiveness, and set salvation's spring
Lift up your hearts in worship, a song of praise enfreeing,
He is the death of dying, the primal birth of being.

To him I owe my eyes that I can see the dawn,
To him I owe my heart wherein is pity born;
Whene'er I hear the tempest, I hear him pass along
Midst multitude of voices raised in a holy song;
And yet of his great mercy I beg still one behest:
That I at last be taken to his eternal rest.

Be curses on the fellow who would my praise acclaim,
But blessings upon him who does my soul defame;
Believe no matter whom who slanders my renown,
Give power to the arm that lifts to strike me down;
Let him upon the earth above all others loom
Who steals away the stone that lies upon my tomb.

Hunted by humanity, let me my whole life fly
Until I feel from weeping my very eyes are dry;
Let everyone detest me no matter where I go,
Until from persecution myself I do not know;
Let misery and horror my heart transform to stone,
That I may hate my mother, in whose love I have grown;
Till hating and deceiving for me with love will vie,
And I forget my suffering, and learn at last to die.

Dishonoured let me perish, an outcast among men;
My body less than worthy to block the gutter then,
And may, o God of mercy, a crown of diamonds wear
The one who gives my heart the hungry dogs to tear,
While for the one who in my face does callous fling a clod
In your eternal kingdom reserve a place, o God.

Thus only, gracious Father, can I requitance give
That you from your great bounty vouched me the joy to live;
To gain eternal blessings my head I do not bow,
But rather ask that you in hating compassion show.
Till comes at last the evening, your breath will mine efface,
And into endless nothing I go, and leave no trace.

Look, that star that's shining
up there, so far away;
Her light has traveled eons
to meet our eye today.

Perhaps she even perished
a long, long time ago;
only her light but now
did cross the way we go.

The icon of this now dead star
slow in the sky it rises.
She was, while we could not her see.
Now that we see, she's vanished.

So, just alike, when feelings faded,
prey to the grinding wheels of time,
the spectre of our weathered love
is doomed to haunt us for a while.

Up to the star new-born in sight
Such long a trail’s to fumble,
Millennia had chased the light
‘fore it ‘on us did stumble…

It might have died along the way,
Sometime ago, in glory,
But ‘tis just now we see a ray
Doth shine to tell its story.

This dead star’s icon ‘cross the sky
Doth slowly venture for a spot:
‘twas there when didn’t meet the eye,
We see it now, and there ‘tis not.

Likewise, though ‘twixt us came the night
And private will did swallow,
Our dead love’s still-inflaming light
Within ourselves doth follow…

Without 'tis autumn, the wind beats on the pane
With heavy drops, the leaves high upwards sweep.
You take old letters from a crumpled heap,
And in one hour have lived your life again.

Musing, in this sweet wise the moments creep:
You pray no caller will your door attain;
Better it is when dreary falls the rain
To dream before the fire, awaiting sleep.

And thus alone, reclining in my chair,
The fairy Dochia's tale comes to my mind
While round me haze is gath'ring in the air.

Then softly down the passage footsteps wind,
Faint, sound of rustling silk upon the stair…
And now my eyes cold, tapering fingers bind.

Dreary the horn sounds in the eve on the hill,
Sheepflocks return, stars on their way twinkle still,
Watersprings weep murmuring clear, and I see
Under a tree, love, thou art waiting for me.

Holy and pure passes the moon on the sky,
Moist seem the stars born from the vault clear and high,
Longing thine eyes look from afar to divine,
Heaving thy breast, pensive thy head doth recline.

Tired with their toil, peasants come back from the field,
From the old church, labourer's comfort and shield,
Voices of bells thrill the whole sky high above;
Struck is my heart, trembling and burning with love.

Ah! very soon quietness steals over all,
Ah! very soon hasten shall I to thy call,
Under the tree, there I shall sit the whole night,
Telling thee, love, thou art my only delight.

Cheek press'd to cheek, there in sweet ecstasy we,
Falling asleep under the old locust-tree,
Smiling in dream, seem in a heaven to live,
For such a night who his whole life would not give?

p'ror born a poet;
Woman's own divine attraction, still enticing as I saw it.

Raphael enwrapped in dreaming as below a starry sky
- Just a spirit drunk with light-rays and with Springs that never die -
Saw you and thus dreamed of Eden - flowery and redolent, -
Saw you as a queen of heaven, 'mong the angels' merriment,

And upon the empty canvas traced the God-Star of the Sea,
With a star-adorned tiara, with her bland smile, maidenly,
Pale complexion framed by gold rays - angel-like yet feminine:
After woman have been modelled angels in the vaults serene.

Thus myself, lost in the darkness of a life bent on the lyre,
Noticed you - a shallow woman, poor in soul and poor in fire -
And I wrought from you an angel, gentle as the magic day,
When, upon a life laid barren, blandly smiles a lucky ray.

Seeing that your face was pallid with a sickly drunkenness
And your lips turned purple, bitten by corruption and excess;
Cruel one, I cast upon you poetry's veil - white and dense
Covering your morbid pallour with the beams of innocence,

I had given you the pale rays which pour, magic and unreal,
On the brow of genius-angels, of angel turned ideal;
I changed demon into vestal, giggles into symphony,
And your leering sidelong glanced into the Aurora's glee.

But by now the veil has fallen! Tearing me from dreams of bliss
You are sobering my forehead with the frost-bite of your kiss
Now I'm looking at you, demon, and my love - quenched, cold, forlorn,
Teaches me to look upon you with the icy eye of scorn.

You appear as a bacchante who has stolen by deceit
Martyrdom's green wreath of myrtle mingled with a maiden's pleat
Holy was the Virgin's spirit, prayer's very counterpart,
While a long spasmodic frenzy pictures the bacchante's heart.

Oh, as Raphael created our God-Star of the Sea,
With a star-adorned tiara, with her bland smile, maidenly,
I myself have rendered godly what was merely feminine,
Just a cold and leaden woman, barren-hearted, viperine!

Are you crying, child? - Your eyes which abjectly now supplicate -
Can they once more crush and crumble my heart of an apostate?
I have kissed your hand, I'm kneeling, searching your dark, sea-deep eyes
Asking them if you can pardon - humbly I apologize.

Wipe your eyes, abandon crying! My reproach was out of season -
Cruel, unjust accusation, lacking grounding, lacking reason.
Heart of hearts! E'en though a demon through our love you're sanctified
And I venerate this demon with fair hair, eyes opened wide.

Never fancied, nay, I’d learn to die sometime;
Forever young, all wrapped up in my mantle,
Raised my wistful eyes with furtherance upon
Isolation’s orb.

Out of time then, aye, didst come subdue my course,
Excruciation thou, deliriously sweet…
Lest should count the drinks I chose to sip dead dry
Death’s unyielding lust.

Wretched breath afire I’m just pain like Nessus,
Or Hercules envenomed with his tunic;
As much as I wish can’t seem to quench this blaze
Seas all flowing in.

Over my own dream, I’m consumed in wailing,
On my private pyre, liquefied in flames…
Will I ever beam perchance reversed from it
The way Phoenix did?

Vanished be my eyne too stirrin’ from my course,
Come subdue my chest, oh mirthless apathy;
That I may die in peace, better let me be
Rendered unto me!


"Forest, trusted friend and true,
Forest dear, how do you do?
Since the day I saw you last
Many, many years have passed
And though you still steadfast stand
I have travelled many a land."

"Yea, and I, what have I done?
Watched the years their seasons run;
Heard the squalls that through me groan
Ere my singing birds have flown;
Heard the creaking of my boughs
Neath the mounted winter snows.
Yea indeed, what have I done?
Done as I have always done;
Felt my summer leaves re-growing,
Heard the village girls who going
By the path that meets the spring
Melancholy doina sing."

"Forest, though the tempests blow,
The years come and the years go,
And the seasons wax and wane,
You are ever young again."

"What of seasons, when for ages
All the sky my lake engages;
What of years ill or good,
When the sap mounts in the wood;
What of years or ill,
When the Danube rolls on still.
Only man is always changing,
O'er the world forever ranging;
We each do our place retain,
As we were, so we remain;
Oceans, rivers, mountains high
And the stars that light the sky,
Saturn with its whirling rings,
And the forest with its springs."

When, at night, with drooping eyelids, I blow out the candles flare,
Time's unending path is followed only by the old clock there;
For just draw aside the curtains and the moon will flood the room
With a fire of passions summoned by the ardours of her gloom;
From the night of recollection she will resurrect an eon
Of distress - which we, however, sense as in a dreamlike paean.

Moon, arch-mistress of the ocean, you glide o'er the planet's sphere,
You give light to thoughts unthought -of and eclipse sorrow and fear;
Oh, how many derserts glimmer under your soft virgin light
And how many woods o'ershadow brooks and rivers burning bright!
Legion is the name of billows you dispose of as you please,
When you sail upon the ever restless solitude of seas;
Of resplendent climes, of gardens, palaces and castles old,
Which you impregnate with magic and to your own view unfold;
of the dwellings that you enter tiptoe by the window-pane
To gaze thoughtfully at foreheads that so many thoughts enchain!
A king's plans enmesh the planet for a century or more,
While the pauper hardly thinks of what his morrow has in store.

Though the dice of Fate have to them meted different rungs and ways,
Both submit to the same biddings of Death's genius and her rays;
Be they weak or be they mighty, unintelligent or clever.
All do minister to passions and their bondsmen are forever.
One is looking for the mirror, purposing to curl his mane,
One - for truth, hoping to find it in the space and time mundane.
From the yellow leaves he gathers relics of forgotten lore
Whose short-living Latin labels he will tally on the score.
One divides up the whole Terra at the counter of his stall,
Checking how much gold the oceans bear in their ships black and tall.
Over there an aged teacher, with his elbows jutting out
Through the threadbare jacket, reckons and the sums cause him to pout.
Shivering with cold he buttons his old dressing-gown austere,
Thrusts his neck into the collar and the cotton in his ear.
Skinny as he is and hunch-backed, a most wretched ne'er-do-well,
He has in his little finger all the world, heaven and hell;
For behind his brow are looming both the future and the past,
And eternity's thick darkness hell' unravel at long last.
As, of old, mythical Atlas propped the skies upon his shoulder,
He props universe and Chronos in a number - which is bolder...

While the moon is shining over mouldy books-stacks penned by sages
Thinking takes him back through thousands upon thousands of hoar ages
To the very first, when being and non-being were nought still,
When there was but utter absence of both life-impulse and will,
When unopen there was nothing, although everything was hidden,'
When, by His own self pervaded, resting lay the Allforbidden.
Was it an abyss? a chasm? wat'ry plains without an end?
There was no estate of wisdom, nor a mind to comprehend.
For the darkness was as solid as is still the shadows' ocean,
And no eyes, had there been any, could have formed of it a notion.
Of the unmade things the shadows had not yet begun to gleam
And, with its own self-contented, peace eternal reigned supreme.
Suddenly, a dot starts moving - the primeval, lonely Other...
It becomes the father potent, of the void it makes the mother.
Weaker than a drop of water, this small dot that moves and bounds
Is the unrestricted ruler of the world's unbounded bounds.
Ever since the vasty dimness has been splitting slice by slice,
Ever since come into being earth, sun, moon, light, heat, and ice.
Ever since up to the present gallaxies of planets lost
Follow up mysterious courses, chaos-bred and chaos-tossed,
And in endlessness begotten, endless swarms of light are thronging
Towards life, for ever driven by an infinite of longing;
And in this great world, we, children of a world grotesquely small,
Raise upon our tiny planet anthills to o'ertop the All,
Lilliputian kings and peoples, soldiers, unread, erudite,
We engender generations, reckoning ourselves full bright!
One-day moths upon a mudball measeurable with the chip,
We rotate in the great vastness and forget 'twixt cup and lip
That this world is really nothing but a moment caught in light,
That behind, or else before it, all that one can see is night.
Just like whirls of dust and powder thousands of live granules play
In a glorious ray's dominion and pass over with the ray.
Thus against the never-failing night of time without a bound,
The spontaneous ray, the moment, still fails not to go the round;
When it dies, all dies - like shadows melting in the murky distance
For the universe chimeric is a dream of non-existence.

Nowadays a thinker's judgement is restricted by no tether;
He projects it in a moment over centuries together.
To his eye the sun all-glorious is a red orb wrapt in shrouds,
Closing like a bleeding ulcer among all-darkening clouds,
He sees how the heavenly bodies in vast spaces freeze and run,
Rebels that have torn the fetters of the dazzling light and sun;
And, behold, the world's foundation is now blackened to the core,
And the stars, like leaves in autumn, flicker out and are no more,
Lifeless Time distends his body and becomes endless duration,
Because nothing ever happens in the boundless desolation;
In the night of non-existence all is crumbled, all are slain,
And, in keeping with its nature, peace eternal reigns again.


***

Starting with the very bottom of the busy human hive
And ascending on the ladder to the mightiest kings alive,
Everybody by the riddle of his being is obsessed,
But, alas, there is no telling which of them is more unblest.
In each one there is a woman, in each one there is a man,
And above all other people only risses he who can,
While the rest, in darkness keeping, every one a fearful gnome,
Lose themselves in utter secret, like the never-sighted foam.
Much, indeed, will blind Fate notice what they do, or think or know!
Over human life it passes like the wind, blow after blow.

Let the writers laud his merits, let the world cry out "Allhail!"
To the aged teacher, really, is all this of much avail?
He will be - perhaps - immortal. His life clung, we must agree,
To a single great idea, like the ivy to a tree.
"If I die", he says pro sibi, "centuries may come and go,
For my name shall be remembered and to time shall ever grow.
Everywhere and in all ages, with my name on titles signed,
Shall my writings find a shelter in the corners of some mind."
Oh, poor soul! Can you remember what you've heard the million say?
What has come around you, what yourself have talked away?
Much too little. Here you've noted of some imagery a strip,
There the shred of an idea, there the scribble on a scrip;
Well then, if your own existence was a mystery to you,
Why should others rack their five wits and its secrecy undo?
After centuries a green-eyed pedant, squeezed by shelf on shelf
Of dilapidated volumes, stooping - an old crock himself - ,
Will appraise the atticism of your language and your style,
Blow from his worn-out eye-glasses the dust raised by your wise pile,
And compress you to a sentence, carrying you off the stage
By some ignominious footnote that winds up a silly page.

You may build a world, or wreck it, but, whatever you would say,
Everything at last is buried under shovelfuls of clay.
Hands that coveted the sceptre of the universe, ideals
That would scan the whole creation, find their size in four fir-deals.
The procession queues behind you in the old funeral wise,
Splendid as a walking sarcasm gazing with indifferent eyes.
High above the rest, a pygmy will then set out to discourse,
Not to emphasize your merits but to praise his own, of course;
For your name is just a pretext. That is all you can expect.
The succeeding generations are, well, even more "correct".
Failing to attain your compass, will they show their admiration?
Sure, they will applaud the slender biographical narration
Which attempts to prove that never have you been a man that mattered,
That you were just like the others. Everybody is much flattered
If you are not his superior. Everybody will be able
To dilate his stupid nostrils at a scholars' council-table
When your person is his topic. He projected long ago
With ironical grimaces to extol you high and low.
In this way you will be playing into everybody's hands;
He will say that all is wicked who but little understands...
Furthermore, they will endeavour to anatomize your morals,
To find blemishes and mischiefs, petty scandals, petty quarrels, -
All of which will surely draw you nearer to them. Not the light
You have to the world imparted, but your sins, your guilt, your spite,
Tiredness, ill-health, or weakness, anything that is unworth
And is fatally inherent in a mortal lump of earth.
All the pretty smarts and worries of a much tormented mind
Will attract them more than any plans you have ever designed.


***

Among walls, and trees, and blossoms that are falling white and tender,
How the full moon is diffusing her own calm and radiant splendour!
From the night of recollection myriads of longings beam
And their pain is mitigated' we feel them as in a dream,
For she opens wide the entrance to our inner world of doubt,
Conjuring a host of shadows when the candlelight is out.
Oh, how many deserts glimmer under your soft virgin light,
And how many woods o'ershadow brooks and rivers burning bright!
Legion is the name of billows you dispose of as you please,
When you sail over the ever restless solitude of seas;
And all those who in their lifetime are subjected to Fate's ways
Must submit to the same biddings of Death's genius and your rays!




